1
Exposing the Invisible: Detecting Stealthy
Parameter-Based Cyber-Attacks on Inverter
Synchronization Loops
Zaint A. Alexakis, IEEE Member, Michal M. Drewniak, and Charalambos Konstantinou, IEEE Senior Member
Abstract—The increasing integration of Internet-of-Things
(IoT) technologies for monitoring and control of inverter-based
resources (IBRs) has expanded the attack surface, enabling
stealthy manipulation of controller parameters through vulner-
able supervisory control interfaces. Phase-locked loops (PLLs)
emerge as prime targets, as they interact with all control loops
and critically influence the dynamic response of grid-following
(GFL) converters. This paper analyzes the underlying threat
model to elucidate the mechanisms enabling such stealthy be-
havior and conducts a thorough stability and transient response
analysis to characterize how PLL tampering can degrade system
performance without necessarily destabilizing the system. The
results reveal critical interactions among frequency estimation,
control, and synchronization that can significantly reduce stabil-
ity margins. To counter the stealthy nature of these attacks, a
modified PLL is proposed that exposes gain variations through
shifts in its equilibrium points while preserving conventional PLL
performance. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach in detecting PLL cyber-attacks.
Index Terms—Phase-locked loop, cyber-attack, attack detec-
tion, stability analysis, synchronization.
I. INTRODUCTION
The power grid is transitioning from centralized, generator-
based
operation
to
decentralized
coordination
of
grid-
connected distributed generation, including inverter-based-
resources (IBRs) [1]. While this shift supports decarboniza-
tion, it introduces challenges such as reduced system inertia
and damping, formation of weak or isolated networks prone
to voltage disturbances and instability, and increased cyber-
security risks [2]–[4]. Poorly integrated Internet-of-Things
(IoT) technologies in power plant coordination have expanded
attack surfaces, allowing adversaries to exploit vulnerabilities
in critical communication channels and potentially disrupt grid
operations [5]–[7].
Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)-based
attacks are a credible threat, as evidenced by previous inci-
dents. In particular, the cyber-attack reported in [8] demon-
strates how adversaries can disrupt communication between
utilities and IBRs in California and Wyoming, exposing critical
vulnerabilities in operational infrastructure. Other prominent
cases include the 2019 disruption of communications with
multiple renewable installations in Utah, and recent attacks
on Poland’s electricity grid [9], in which adversaries bypassed
local firewalls and erased supervisory device firmware without
Z. A. Alexakis, M. M. Drewniak, and C. Konstantinou are with the
Computer, Electrical & Mathematical Sciences and Engineering (CEMSE)
Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Thuwal, 23955, Saudi Arabia. C. Konstantinou is also with the Energy
Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, 78712, United
States. M. M. Drewniak is also with the Department of Power Electronics &
Energy Control Systems, AGH University of Krakow, Krakow 30-059, Poland.
forensic traces. Beyond disrupting communication and super-
visory functions, vulnerable SCADA interfaces can also be
exploited to target grid stability directly. This is exemplified
in [10], [11], where the control parameters of flexible AC
transmission system (FACTS) devices are manipulated to alter
the reactance of multiple transmission lines, compromising the
grid’s frequency stability.
In this context, PLLs emerge as particularly vulnerable
targets, as they strongly influence IBR transient behavior
through their interactions with multiple control loops [12],
[13]. This vulnerability is further exacerbated by revised grid
codes such as IEEE 1547 [14], which now mandate that GFL
converters, previously focused on market participation and
maximum power point tracking, implement primary control
loops to support grid frequency and voltage, similar to grid-
forming (GFM) IBRs [15]. Meeting these requirements relies
on accurate frequency estimation, conventionally derived from
PLLs [16]. As a result, PLLs are no longer used strictly for
synchronization but also support controllers spanning longer
time-scales, such as droop control, thereby dictating the overall
small-signal profile of IBRs. This strong coupling between
PLLs and the various control layers may be exploited by
adversaries seeking to harm this critical infrastructure: as
illustrated in [17], attackers exploiting vulnerabilities in IBR
communication channels can gain access to supervisory inter-
faces and manipulate critical PLL gains to degrade system
operation, destabilize the network, or unnecessarily trigger
protection mechanisms.
The severity of such attacks lies in their stealthy nature.
As shown in [17], if PLL tampering occurs at steady state,
the system may appear unaffected, with the consequences
manifesting only during subsequent disturbances. However,
that work does not analyze the underlying mechanisms that
render these attacks stealthy and evasive, and thus difficult to
detect, which warrant further investigation. The same threat
model is examined in [18], where adversaries nullify the
integral gain of the synchronization PLL to induce power devi-
ations, exploiting the ability of the resulting proportional-only
PLL to track grid frequency while introducing a steady-state
phase error that produces power regulation errors in current-
controlled GFL IBRs. However, this attack is conspicuous
rather than stealthy, as the loss of PLL phase lock leaves an
immediate detection trace and is readily flagged by protection
mechanisms. Furthermore, power shifting through this threat
model can only be realized in the absence of dedicated primary
controllers, a highly unlikely scenario given the mandate of
IEEE 1547 [14]. To mitigate this vulnerability, the authors
propose an alternative synchronization scheme that neutralizes
arXiv:2608.30574v1  [eess.SY]  31 Aug 2026
the attack at the expense of degraded system performance. The
authors further introduce an attack detection method; however,
it is restricted to the case in which the integral gain is nullified
and fails to detect any other PLL gain tampering pattern.
Similarly, [19] presents a PLL-less current control strategy
that addresses the considered threat model but does not surpass
the performance of conventional PLL-based implementations.
These limitations establish a clear need for a systematic
framework capable of rigorously analyzing this attack vector,
quantifying its impact on system performance, and exposing
otherwise stealthy intrusions, while providing non-disruptive
protection for vulnerable power electronic interfaces.
The stakes of this gap are high: without an explicit char-
acterization of how PLL tampering propagates through the
control layers, operators cannot gauge an attack’s severity or
the conditions under which its consequences surface, a press-
ing concern for grid-supporting GFL IBRs that rely on PLLs
for primary-control implementation. In [17], [18], simulation-
based analyses of grid-supporting IBRs highlight the impact of
estimator dynamics on system performance and fault recovery
time. However, an explicit small-signal analysis incorporating
these supplementary loops is still lacking, particularly under
weak-grid conditions where the control loops interact with the
PLL used for synchronization. These analyses are essential
to fully understand these interactions and to ensure that IBR
infrastructures remain stable and resilient to poor transients
and potential instabilities.
This paper pursues two primary objectives. First, it formu-
lates and rigorously analyzes a mathematical threat model for
stealthy PLL tampering, explicitly capturing the mechanism by
which the attack evades detection and quantifying its impact
on IBR dynamics through comprehensive small- and large-
signal analyses. Prior works study such attacks, but do not
analyze the mechanism underlying their stealthiness. Second,
an effective detection framework is developed to safeguard
critical IBR infrastructure without compromising nominal con-
trol performance, making it straightforward to integrate into
existing GFL plants. Specifically, this work proposes a novel
robust synchronization unit (RSU)-based PLL architecture
that renders both proportional and integral gain manipula-
tions observable through shifts in equilibrium points while
preserving the small-signal behavior of conventional PLLs.
This overcomes the limitations of existing approaches, which
either detect only the special case of integral-gain nullification,
degrade performance, or eliminate the PLL altogether, as
summarized in the comparison in Table I. A further strength of
the framework is its generality, as the same equilibrium-based
principle can be extended naturally to a broad class of IBR
control architectures, exposing parameter changes wherever
they occur. Its effectiveness is demonstrated through extensive
simulation studies and validated via controller hardware-in-
the-loop (CHIL) experiments.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II presents a detailed modeling framework for IBR-
dominated power systems, while Section III introduces a grid-
code-compliant GFL control framework based on dynamic
frequency estimation. The threat model is formulated in Sec-
tion IV, and Section V provides both small- and large-signal
TABLE I: Comparison with the existing literature.
Feature
[17] [18] [19] This work
Threat model and stealthiness analysis
◦
◦
◦
✓
Small-/large-signal attack impact assessment
◦
✗
◦
✓
PLL gain tampering detection
✗
◦
◦
✓
Nominal PLL performance preserved
✓
✗
✗
✓
Industrial/GFL controller compatibility
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓fully addressed
◦partially addressed
✗not addressed
analyses to examine the interactions among the frequency
estimator, synchronization and control layers, and other grid-
connected resources. The proposed detection scheme is pre-
sented in Section VI, and experimental results validating its
effectiveness and applicability are reported in Section VII.
Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. SYSTEM MODELING
A model-based approach is required to comprehensively
analyze PLL-targeting cyber-attacks, as adversarial gain tam-
pering ultimately seeks to alter the small-signal characteristics
of IBRs. Such analyses enable the approximate quantifica-
tion of the impact of these cyber-attacks and facilitate the
formulation of the most detrimental attack models, which
inherently supports the design of effective detection schemes.
Accordingly, this section presents a detailed model of IBR-
dominated networks, comprising a diverse mixture of GFL
and GFM resources and their associated control schemes.
A. Power Converters
Power converters are commonly represented using equiva-
lent averaged models, in which they are formulated as ideal
voltage sources connected to the point of common coupling
(PCC) through an RL filter and a shunt capacitor. This system
can be expressed using the Park transformation, which maps
system states into a stationary two-axis (dq) reference frame,
thereby facilitating analysis and control design. The current
dynamics in the dq domain are given by [20]:
liı′Li
d,i = −riıLi
d,i + ωp,iliıLi
q,i + vLi
f,d,i −vLi
c,d,i,
(1)
liı′Li
q,i = −riıLi
q,i −ωp,iliıLi
d,i + vLi
f,q,i −vLi
c,q,i,
(2)
where i ∈C, with C being the set of power converters. The
parameters ri, li denote the ith converter parasitic resistance
and inductance of the filter, ωp,i is the IBR frequency, derived
from PLLs for GFL converters and from the swing equation
for GFM ones, ıLi
d,i, ıLi
q,i are the converter output currents, vLi
f,d,i,
vLi
f,q,i and vLi
c,d,i, vLi
c,q,i are the dq- frame inverter and capacitor
voltages. The superscript (·)Li denotes quantities expressed in
the ith local reference frame. The capacitor voltages of the
power converters’ filters are given by:
Civ
′Li
c,d,i=−vLi
c,d,i/Ri+ωp,iCivLi
c,q,i+
X
i∈Ωj
ıLi
in,d,i−
X
i∈Fj
ıLi
out,d,i, (3)
Civ
′Li
c,q,i=−vLi
c,q,i/Ri−ωp,iCivLi
c,d,i+
X
i∈Ωj
ıLi
in,q,i−
X
i∈Fj
ıLi
out,q,i, (4)
with Ci, Ri denoting the capacitance and resistive load, and
vLi
c,d,i, vLi
c,q,i the capacitor dq-voltages. The summed terms cor-
respond to the line currents entering and leaving the capacitor.
Specifically, Ωj and Fj denote, respectively, the sets of indices
associated with currents entering and leaving the capacitor.
2
The voltage and current equations are defined in the local
dq frame associated with each power converter. Specifically,
each subsystem operates in its own dq frame, which enables
the implementation of its controller and requires all system
states to be expressed in the corresponding local coordinates.
B. Line, Load and Network Dynamics
The power network is modeled using strictly resistive-
inductive lines and complex loads. Contrary to [17], this paper
considers the full nonlinear models of both lines and loads in
order to accurately capture their interactions and their impact
on the stability of IBRs. The dynamics of the transmission
lines are described by:
ll,i ı′G
l,d,i = −rl,iıG
l,d,i + ωgll,iıG
l,q,i + vG
s,d,i −vG
e,d,i,
(5)
ll,i ı′G
l,q,i = −rl,iıG
l,q,i −ωgll,iıG
l,d,i + vG
s,q,i −vG
e,q,i,
(6)
where i ∈L, with L denoting the set of transmission lines.
Here, ıG
l,d,i and ıG
l,q,i denote the line currents in the dq reference
frame; rl,i and ll,i are the line resistance and inductance,
respectively; and vG
s,d,i, vG
s,q,i and vG
e,d,i, vG
e,q,i represent the
sending- and receiving-end voltages in the dq frame. The
superscript (·)G denotes quantities expressed in the global
reference frame. The global reference frame is a common
rotating frame with angular frequency ωg and is used to
mathematically interconnect the local reference frames of the
converters. At steady state, it represents the grid frequency.
Inductive loads can be modeled in the same manner by
assuming that the receiving-end voltage of the corresponding
line is connected to ground. Converter-free load buses can also
be modeled using (3)-(4); however, in this case, all states must
be formulated in the global reference frame.
C. Generalized Power System Model
The distinction between local and global reference frames
enables the modeling of synchronization dynamics for indi-
vidual subsystems, including GFL and GFM IBRs. However,
it complicates stability analysis, as transitioning between ref-
erence frames requires coordinate transformations. Suppose
that xLi = [xLi
d , xLi
q ] and xG = [xG
d , xG
q ] represent a power-
system state expressed in the local and global reference frames,
respectively. These states can be written in phasor form as:
XG =
 xG
d + jxG
q

ej
R
ωg dt,
(7)
XLi =

xLi
d + jxLi
q

ej
R
ωp,i dt.
(8)
This representation is consistent with the αβ transformation;
therefore, a rotation matrix, R [21], can be used to transition
between reference frames. The same concept applies to the
phasor representation, yielding:
XG = XLiej
R
(ωp,i−ωg)dt,
(9)
or, equivalently:
XG =

xLi
d + jxLi
q

e−j∆θ,
(10)
where ∆θ denotes the phase difference between the local and
global frames and satisfies:
∆˙θi = ωg −ωp,i.
(11)
Fig. 1: Frequency-support curve.
Similarly, the transformation from the global reference frame
to the local reference frame is given by:
XLi =
 xG
d + jxG
q

ej∆θ.
(12)
At steady state, ωg = ωs
p,i must hold for all i ∈C, where
the superscript (·)s denotes steady-state, to ensure that the
dq quantities expressed in the global reference frame remain
constant. This requirement facilitates stability analysis, as the
corresponding equilibrium point is a constant vector, provided
that the power system model is stable. It is emphasized that
even if the reference frequency of the global frame differs from
that of the local frames at steady state, the local dq frames
constructed by the power converters will still reach consensus
on a common system frequency as a result of primary control.
In this study, the global reference frequency ωg is derived from
the local reference frame of one of the power converters.
III. ANCILLARY SERVICES-ORIENTED IBR CONTROLLERS
Naturally, GFM converters provide ancillary services such
as frequency and voltage support. However, GFL IBRs mainly
focus on maximum power injection. On the other hand,
conventional GFL schemes are not designed explicitly for real-
time frequency support and can occasionally weaken the grid
instead of strengthening it. To address this concern, revised
grid regulations, [14], require GFL converters to strictly follow
the droop-like characteristic illustrated in Fig. 1, where the
power output of the converter is adjusted according to the
system’s frequency. These curves exhibit two key features:
the deadband and the slope, the latter being equivalent to
the active-power droop coefficient. Similarly, an analogous
droop characteristic is specified for the reactive power control
loop with respect to the PCC voltage; however, it is omitted
here to avoid redundancy. For clarity, the converter index i
is suppresed hereafter, as the following analysis focuses on a
single representative GFL converter, with the results applying
identically to every i ∈C. The mathematical representation of
the grid-support controller is given below:
Pr = Ps + f (mP (ωn −ωg)) ,
(13)
Qr = Qs + f (mQ (|v|n −|v|pcc)) ,
(14)
where ωg and ωn correspond to the measured and nominal
grid frequencies, vn and vpcc the nominal and measured PCC
voltage. Finally, mP , mQ correspond to the active and reactive
power droop gains, while f denotes the deadband function:
f(x) =





x −δ,
if x > δ,
0,
if |x| ≤δ,
x + δ,
if x < −δ,
(15)
3
Fig. 2: Grid-supporting GFL control scheme.
where δ represents the deadband threshold. According to
the ENTSO-E Frequency Sensitive Mode grid code [22], the
maximum value for δ is 0.5 Hz. For δ = 0, the deadband is
always inactive.
The reference power is then usually channeled through a
rate limiter (RL) to ensure that it adheres to physical plant
restrictions and grid-codes:
˙Psr = ˙Pmsat (a (Pr −Psr)) ,
(16)
where ’sat’ denotes the saturation function, ˙Pm the maximum
allowed derivative limit and a is a tuning parameter. The
overall control diagram is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The controller defined by (13) and (16) requires two inputs:
the reference power Ps and an estimate of the grid frequency.
The method used to obtain ωg significantly affects the con-
verter’s response during frequency support. GFL converters
implement PLLs for both synchronization and frequency es-
timation for grid-monitoring purposes. However, PLLs are
tuned to act instantaneously, enabling the implementation of
upper control layers. Consequently, the slightest grid-side
disturbance significantly excites the PLL dynamics and its
output frequency, which can drive an excessive reaction of
the ancillary-service power controller despite the implemented
deadband safeguard. This can be addressed by separating the
synchronization and frequency-estimation functions into two
distinct PLLs that are tuned individually, so that a slower
frequency-estimation PLL can be assigned independently of
the synchronization dynamics. The same flexibility applies
in the opposite case: under weak-grid conditions, where the
synchronization PLL must be slowed to preserve stability,
the separated structure still permits a responsive frequency-
estimation PLL, decoupling the frequency-support response
from the synchronization bandwidth.
This representation is made without loss of generality,
since it is structurally equivalent to a single synchronization
PLL augmented with additional frequency-estimation loops.
Expressing the scheme as two PLLs additionally allows each
function, synchronization and frequency estimation, to be
described and tuned in common PLL terms, such as bandwidth
and damping ratio, so that the two loops are decoupled
and the transient behavior and stability margins of each are
inferred directly from well-established PLL design principles,
as substantiated by the formal stability analysis in Section V.
Specifically, the synchronization layer implements the
synchronously rotating frame (SRF) PLL to track the phase,
frequency and voltage magnitude of the grid:
ωp = ωn + kp,svL
c,q + z,
(17)
˙z = ki,svL
c,q,
(18)
with kp,s and ki,s being the proportional and integral gains
of the PLL, and θp =
R
ωp dt is the estimated input voltage
phase. Since the analysis applies identically to both PLLs, the
subscript s is omitted hereafter. The local-frame representation
of the q-axis converter output voltage, vL
c,q, can then be
formulated using the transformation (12):
vL
c,d + jvL
c,q =
 vG
c,d + jvG
c,q

ej∆θ,
(19)
where the auxiliary state ∆θ, representing the phase error
between the global and local frames, is given by:
∆˙θ = ωg −ωp.
(20)
Equating the real and imaginary parts yields:
vL
c,q = vG
c,q cos ∆θ + vG
c,d sin ∆θ.
(21)
The outer-loop controller employs the same PLL formulation
to estimate the grid frequency:
ωo = ωn + kp,ovLo
c,q + zo,
(22)
˙zo = ki,ovLo
c,q,
(23)
where kp,o and ki,o denote the proportional and integral
gains of the frequency estimator, respectively. Here, ωo is the
estimated frequency. The superscript (·)Lo indicates quantities
expressed in the reference frame of the outer-loop controller.
Following the same procedure used for the synchronization
PLL, the outer-loop representation of the PCC voltage is
obtained by transforming it from the local PLL reference frame
to the outer-loop reference frame:
vLo
c,d + jvLo
c,q =
 vL
c,d + jvL
c,q

ej∆θo.
(24)
Here, ∆θo, similarly to ∆θ, is an auxiliary variable that
represents the phase difference between the local reference
frame and the outer-loop reference frame and is defined by:
∆˙θo = ωp −ωo.
(25)
Incorporating the ancillary services controller fundamentally
alters the core operating principles of GFL converters. In this
context, a critical role is played by the frequency estimator, and
its interaction with the synchronization PLL, as well as with
other grid components such as GFM converters, RLs and the
deadband threshold. These interdependencies may be exploited
by adversaries seeking to degrade or potentially destabilize
power networks by manipulating PLL gains that are accessible
through supervisory control interfaces. To fully assess the
potential impact of such malicious actions, a comprehensive
threat model must be formulated to characterize both the
nature and the consequences of the cyber-attack.
IV. ATTACK MODEL FORMULATION
Building on the vulnerability exposed in the previous
section, this section formalizes the attacker’s objective and
the notion of stealthiness underlying PLL gain-tampering
attacks. Even when the frequency-estimation and synchroniza-
tion PLLs are properly tuned offline, both remain exposed
to deliberate manipulation by adversaries who compromise
4
supervisory control interfaces [6], overwriting the proportional
and integral gains of either loop. These interfaces, typically
SCADAs and PLCs, can reportedly be breached by exploit-
ing software vulnerabilities to obtain write access, whether
through low-privilege accounts or remotely without prior sys-
tem access, and to overwrite critical control parameters [7],
[23]. The severity of this attack lies in its stealthy nature:
altering the gains once the system has reached steady state
produces no observable anomaly in the nominal response of
the PLLs, and the impact surfaces only when a subsequent
disturbance excites the modified dynamics. The attack is
practically manifested as a one-time parameter overwrite that
requires no real-time observation by the adversary, a threat
model also considered in [17]–[19], and examined next to
identify the factors that allow it to remain undetected.
Before proceeding with the analysis, the PLL gains prior to
the attack are denoted as kn
p and kn
i , and the gains after the
attack as ka
p and ka
i . The same analysis applies to both the
frequency estimator and the synchronization PLL; hence, the
gain subscripts are omitted, and the analysis is conducted for a
generic PLL model. Accordingly, the objective of the attacker
can be summarized as follows:
kn
p →ka
p,
kn
i →ka
i .
(26)
To analyze how an attack is perceived from the operator’s
perspective, the closed-loop PLL dynamics are reformulated
by incorporating the coordinate transformation in (20) and
assuming interconnection to an arbitrary grid voltage. Suppose
that the operator has access to vLo
c,q and the frequency estimate
provided by the PLL. For ˆV = 1 pu, the q-axis voltage in the
local frame is given by vL
c,q = ˆV sin ∆θ, yielding:
∆˙θ = ωg −ωn −kn
p sin ∆θ −z,
(27)
˙z = kn
i sin ∆θ.
(28)
The equilibrium points are yielded from:
∆θs = 0,
zs = ωg −ωn.
(29)
An attack is stealthy if operators or monitoring systems that
check the states against their expected steady-state values
cannot detect it. Whether the adopted threat model is stealthy
thus depends on its effect on the equilibrium. Let ηs =
(∆θs, zs)n −(∆θs, zs)a be the difference between the pre-
and post-attack equilibria, where (∆θs, zs)n and (∆θs, zs)a
denote the equilibrium pairs before and after the attack, as
monitored by the operator. From (29), tampering that preserves
integral action leaves the equilibrium unchanged, so ηs = 0, in
agreement with the observations in [17], [18]. Consequently,
if the system is at steady state when (26) occurs, it remains at
equilibrium, unperturbed and without any transient behavior,
despite the changed gains.
A straightforward and conspicuous strategy that an adver-
sary may adopt is to completely nullify the integral gain
(ka
i = 0), as illustrated in [18]. As shown in [24], the SRF
PLL can still track the grid frequency with a proportional-only
controller, that is, with the integral gain set to zero; however,
exact phase tracking cannot be achieved, resulting in a steady-
state error in power regulation when direct power control is
implemented through current regulators, as in [19]. Under this
condition, an attacker can actively manipulate the active power
output of the plant [19]. Here, since ηs = [(ωg −ωn)/ka
p, 0]̸ =
[0, 0], the attack is immediately detected: the induced phase er-
ror prevents the exact phase lock that synchronization requires,
which is reflected in critical controller states such as the dq
voltages and triggers converter disconnection due to loss of
synchronization, exposing the tampering. The more capable
threat model of [17], however, which considers all possible
combinations of PLL gain manipulation that preserve integral
action, always yields ηs = 0, leaving no observable trace
for operators to detect the attack, which makes it particularly
dangerous and is therefore the threat model considered in this
work. Since ηs captures precisely any shift in the monitored
steady-state values, it provides an exact mathematical charac-
terization of the stealth notion introduced above.
Remark 1. A PLL gain tampering cyber-attack remains
stealthy if and only if ηs = 0.
Consequently, capturing any tampering of the PLL gains
requires ηs̸ = 0, a condition that, for the threat model of
(26), cannot be satisfied by the conventional PLL structure.
This becomes clearer through (29): owing to the exact phase
tracking enabled by the integral term, the equilibrium point
is always the same for a given grid frequency. This motivates
a systematic analysis of the impact of both the frequency-
estimation and synchronization PLL parameters on the small-
and large-signal behavior of the IBR, in order to anticipate
gain-tampering strategies that degrade system performance and
to design a detection mechanism capable of identifying such
attacks.
V. PLL IMPACT ON STABILITY AND TRANSIENT
RESPONSE
As evident from (13), the frequency estimator and its
interaction with nonlinear elements, such as RLs, critically
influence the dynamic response and small-signal behavior of
GFL converters. To capture these effects, this section conducts
an explicit small-signal stability analysis, complemented by a
comprehensive simulation study that examines the relationship
between the quality of grid-supporting services provided by
the IBR and the frequency estimator.
A. Small-Signal Analysis
To analyze the interaction between the frequency-supporting
GFL converter and the grid, a simplified single-bus model is
considered, in which a GFM converter is connected to both
Fig. 3: GFL converter connected to a dynamic grid.
5
(a) Synchronization PLL bandwidth: 40 Hz
(b) Synchronization PLL bandwidth: 1 Hz
Fig. 4: Modal analysis for a GFL converter connected to a GFM converter through a 2.5 mH line, for different PLL bandwidths.
a GFL converter and a load at the same bus. The simplified
swing equation can be expressed as:
J∆˙ω = −D∆ω + PGF M + PGF L −PL,
(30)
where ∆ω = ω −ωn is the frequency deviation of the GFM
converter, and PGF M, PGF L, and PL denote the power outputs
of the GFM, GFL converters, and the load, respectively. The
parameter D is the droop coefficient of the GFM IBR and J
its virtual inertia.
Although modern grid codes require GFL converters to
follow the reference structure in (16), here (13) is used for
analytical clarity. Assuming that the PLL input voltage is 1 pu,
the q-axis voltage used by the PLL outer loop in the local
reference frame becomes:
vLo
q
= sin∆ϕ.
(31)
where ∆ϕ is given by:
∆˙ϕ = ω −ωo,
(32)
the PLL dynamics can be written as:
∆˙ϕ = ∆ω −kp,o sin ∆ϕ −zo,
(33)
˙zo = ki,o sin ∆ϕ.
(34)
where the superscript (·)n, denoting pre-attack quantities, is
omitted for clarity.
Substituting these dynamics into the swing equation and
linearizing the trigonometric terms around the equilibrium
∆ϕ∗= 0, the closed-loop linearized system is:
J∆˙˜ω=−D∆˜ω+PGF M +Ps−PL−mP (kp,o∆˜ϕ + ki,o˜zo), (35)
∆˙˜ϕ = ∆˜ω −kp,o∆˜ϕ −ki,o˜zo,
(36)
˙˜zo = ∆˜ϕ.
(37)
The state matrix of this system is:


−D/J
−mP kp,o/J
−mP ki,o/J
1
−kp,o
−ki,o
0
1
0

.
Applying the Routh-Hurwitz criterion to obtain the condi-
tion for the eigenvalues to have strictly negative real parts
yields the stability condition:
mP ki,o
J
−kp,oki,o<k2
p,oD
J
+mP k2
p,o
J
+kp,o
D
J
2
+DmP kp,o
J2
. (38)
This inequality is not satisfied by every combination of PLL
or network parameter values, meaning the system can become
unstable for poorly chosen parameters. Notably, when kp,o =
0, a conventional PLL would be marginally stable, yet under
this simplified model the overall system becomes unstable. If
instead the GFL converter is connected to an infinite bus, J ≈
∞, the stability condition reduces to −kp,oki,o < 0, which
is always satisfied. In this case, the one-bus model explicitly
reveals that the two subsystems decouple, guaranteeing system
stability independently of their interaction. To obtain a more
interpretable stability condition, (38) is rewritten as:
mP ki,o
J
<kp,o
 
ki,o+ kp,oD
J
+ mP kp,o
J
+
D
J
2
+ DmP
J2
!
. (39)
This inequality indicates that when the PLL is extremely
under-damped, the combined system may readily become
unstable. The simplified GFM model is stable in stand-alone
operation; therefore, any potential instability arises solely
from the GFL converter and its outer-loop PLL. A similar
observation was reported in [25], where interactions between
GFM and GFL converters at low bandwidths were shown
to induce instability. This instability is strongly influenced
by the frequency estimator dynamics and may be exploited
by adversaries to degrade system performance or, in extreme
cases, destabilize the power system.
Although the previous results indicate strong coupling
among the IBRs, the reduced-order model cannot fully capture
their interactions, owing to simplifying assumptions such as
neglecting essential IBR dynamics, including the current and
power control loops of the primary (voltage-frequency) control
shown in Fig. 2, and, most importantly, the impact of the
synchronization PLL. To address this limitation, an eigenvalue
analysis is performed on the testbench shown in Fig. 3 under
both strong and weak grid conditions, using the complete
nonlinear closed-loop model established in Sections II and III,
incorporating the network dynamics and the current and power
control loops. The eigenvalues are obtained directly from the
Jacobian of this model, evaluated at the system’s equilibrium
point [13]. The GFL converter is rated at 0.1 MVA, whereas
the GFM IBR has a rating of 1 MVA, with all droop coeffi-
cients for both converters set to 1%.
First, a weak-grid is considered with a 2.9 SCR index.
The synchronization PLL bandwidth is set to 40 Hz, and the
eigenvalues of the system are computed as the bandwidth of
the frequency estimator is increased from 0 to 10 Hz. The
damping ratio ζ, is fixed at 1/
√
2. The results are shown
in Fig. 4a, where the arrows indicate the migration of the
6
Fig. 5: Dominant eigenvalues for a reduced controllers’ bandwidth.
eigenvalues as the PLL bandwidth increases. It can be ob-
served that the system is unstable for lower bandwidth values,
primarily due to weak-grid conditions associated with the low
SCR. As the estimator bandwidth increases, the frequency-
support controller stabilizes the system. This stabilizing effect
is attributed to the grid-forming characteristics of the controller
and its contribution to regulating the PCC frequency and
voltage. However, further increasing the bandwidth eventually
destabilizes the system, as the power and current controllers
as well as the PLL are unable to follow in time the output
of the ancillary services controller. To further illustrate this
phenomenon, the controller bandwidths are reduced by a factor
of three, and the same analysis is repeated. The results, shown
in Fig. 5, indicate that without the frequency-support mecha-
nism the system remains unstable; however, as the frequency
estimator bandwidth increases, stability is achieved at a lower
frequency compared to Fig. 4a. Moreover, the system remains
stable over a wider range of estimator bandwidths. Overall,
excessively slow tuning of the frequency estimator limits the
frequency-support capability of the IBRs and can lead to
instability under weak-grid conditions, while overly aggressive
tuning may produce similar destabilizing effects.
Next, the synchronization PLL bandwidth is reduced to
1 Hz, and the experiment is repeated. The results in Fig. 4b
demonstrate that this adjustment mitigates both small-signal
instability and low-frequency oscillatory modes. In contrast
to using the synchronization PLL for frequency estimation,
increasing the bandwidth of a dedicated PLL now enhances
the fault-ride-through capability of the IBR, as the dominant
eigenvalues shift further into the left-half plane. However,
further increasing the PLL bandwidth again leads to instability.
Finally, the transmission line is removed and the GFM con-
verter is replaced by an infinite bus. The analysis is repeated
for both PLL bandwidth configurations, and the dominant
eigenvalues are shown in Fig. 6. As expected, the dominant
eigenvalues coincide in both cases, and the system remains
stable for all PLL bandwidths.
These results underscore the critical role of frequency
support and estimator dynamics in system stability. Improper
gain tuning can degrade performance or even induce instabil-
ity, providing a potential avenue for adversaries to stealthily
compromise the small-signal behavior of IBRs and the broader
power system.
B. Large-Signal Analysis
This section investigates the impact of the frequency es-
timator dynamics on the performance of the grid-supporting
Fig. 6: Effect of an infinite bus connection on dominant eigenvalues.
IBR during large-signal disturbances, such as load changes.
To conduct a more holistic analysis, a grid with four IBRs is
considered, as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7: Simulation benchmark.
The performance of the frequency-support mechanism is
evaluated by measuring the duration of a voltage sag induced
by a significant load change at bus 3 (+0.15 MW), where
the under-study grid-supporting IBR is located. Specifically,
the voltage-sag duration is measured for different deadband
settings, RL derivative limits, and frequency-estimator band-
widths. The results are illustrated in Fig. 8a.
Each primary controller configuration yields a distinct dy-
namic response, which may either improve or degrade the
voltage recovery time. The shortest recovery times are ob-
tained when no deadband is applied, allowing the controller to
respond immediately to the disturbance. Introducing a RL with
tight power-derivative constraints significantly improves the
response for low PLL bandwidths by suppressing excessively
aggressive control actions. For higher bandwidths, the recovery
time remains nearly constant, as the high-derivative response
of the primary controller is constrained by the RL. Once the
RL becomes inactive, the frequency estimator has already
converged to the grid frequency and therefore has no further
impact on the short-term system dynamics. Increasing the
derivative limits results in similar behavior; however, the
saturation of the recovery time occurs at a substantially shorter
duration.
Incorporating a deadband in the controller limits preemptive
control actions and reduces the participation of the IBR in
grid-support services. As observed in Fig. 8a, the converter
does not contribute to voltage recovery when the estimator
bandwidth is below 4 Hz and the deadband is set to ±0.5 Hz.
For bandwidths between 4 and 9 Hz, the controller operates
counter-productively and increases the recovery time, whereas
for higher bandwidths it improves the response. Increasing
7
(a) Inductive network.
(b) Resistive network.
Fig. 8: Voltage sag duration for different controller and PLL parameters.
the deadband to ±1 Hz leads to qualitatively similar but
more pronounced effects. The combined use of RLs and
deadbands produces an interaction in which the controller
degrades performance at low estimator bandwidths, improves
recovery at intermediate bandwidths, and ultimately leads to
saturation of the recovery time at high bandwidths due to the
restrictive action of the RL.
The impact of the frequency estimator is more pronounced
in resistive networks. To further examine this effect, the
experiment is repeated for a predominantly resistive system
(X/R = 0.6), where both lines and loads exhibit mainly
resistive characteristics. As shown in Fig. 8b, the frequency
estimator plays a critical role in disturbance rejection, with
recovery times ranging from 0.1 ms to 300 ms. However,
its interaction with nonlinear protection elements may either
improve or degrade recovery performance. This behavior is
most evident when the grid-support controller employs RLs:
lower bandwidths reduce recovery time, whereas, in contrast
to inductive networks, increasing the bandwidth results in a
gradual increase in recovery time. These results highlight the
influence of the frequency estimator and its dynamic response
on fast frequency support services. While the combination of
conventional primary control with nonlinear and discontinu-
ous elements can improve system performance during distur-
bances, improper tuning may instead degrade the response.
More importantly, deliberate or malicious manipulation of
controller parameters can render the frequency-support mech-
anism counterproductive and may lead to instability of the
IBR as well as adverse interactions with surrounding loads
and resources.
VI. RSU-BASED DETECTION OF PLL GAIN TAMPERING
A key conclusion derived from the threat-model impact
assessment is that, to meaningfully affect the small-signal
behavior of the plant, an adversary must significantly alter
the proportional gain, the integral gain, or both, since properly
tuned PLLs yield a system that is neither marginally stable nor
underdamped. Building on this insight, this section presents an
effective detection mechanism based on the RSU framework
introduced in [24], capable of capturing stealthy PLL gain ma-
nipulations without compromising system performance. The
proposed detection scheme relies on observing the internal
states of an alternative PLL implementation that behaves
identically to the conventional SRF PLL. The proposed PLL
is described by:
˙θR = ωR = ωN + kiz,
(40)
˙z = arctan vR
c,q −kpz,
(41)
with the Park transformation phase angle for the local control
frame given by
θP = θR + kpz.
(42)
Here ωN is a tunable constant, and the superscript (·)R denotes
quantities expressed in the RSU internal reference frame.
Additionally, ωR and θR are RSU related internal states. An
explicit illustration of the proposed module is presented in
Fig. 9. Considering the coordinate transformation in (20), the
pre-attack equilibrium point of the RSU is:
∆θs = kn
p (ωg −ωN)/kn
i ,
zs = (ωg −ωN)/kn
i ,
(43)
whereas now ∆˙θ = ωg −ωR. Note, at steady state, the
phase error between the Park transformation phase and the
grid voltage,
R
( ˙θP −ωg)dt, is zero. In contrast, due to the
RSU structure, the internal phase error, arctan vR
c,q = ∆θ,
is nonzero. Note that ωN is a constant feed-forward term,
traditionally set to ωn, and therefore does not affect the
small-signal dynamic response of the PLL. Conventionally, it
reduces the tracking effort of the PLL by providing a frequency
reference close to that of the grid; here, however, ωN assumes
two additional roles that reinforce the proposed detection
framework against the adopted threat model, as detailed below.
Evidently, the vector ηs now captures any PLL gain tamper-
ing, since the equilibrium points of (40) and (41) depend on
both kn
p and kn
i , leaving no exploitable pattern for an adversary
to mask an attack. Furthermore, any change in the controller
gains induces a transient in the IBR response, so that even
under communication tampering an anomalous, unexplained
event is flagged. Beyond this, ωN serves two roles. First,
it renders the communicated signals privacy-preserving: with
ωN̸ = ωn, (43) provides only two equations in the three
unknowns kn
p , kn
i , and ωN, so the gains cannot be fully
reconstructed by an interceptor without knowledge of ωN;
the plant operator, which alone knows the implementation
structure and ωN, remains the only entity able to recover
them. Second, it sets the detection margin: since ωN scales the
equilibrium points in (43), increasing |ωg −ωN| enlarges the
steady-state offsets |∆θs| and |zs|, and hence the equilibrium
shift produced by a gain change, making gain tampering
easier to distinguish from frequency fluctuations, measurement
8
noise, and grid-side disturbances. Since ωN does not affect the
transient response of the PLL, it can be tuned to achieve the
desired detection margin and is set once at startup. Moreover,
it need not be exposed to the supervisory (SCADA) interface,
which keeps it private and beyond the reach of the adversary,
who could otherwise mask only integral-gain tampering; since
∆θs = kn
p zs from (43) fixes the proportional relation between
the two equilibria independently of ωN, any change in kn
p
alters this relation and exposes the attack. Alternatively, ωN
can be periodically re-keyed through a cryptographic scheme,
so that a leaked value can be exploited, for gain inference via
(43) or attack masking, only until its next update.
The proposed scheme thus produces an equilibrium-based
footprint that exposes any change in the PLL gains, prompting
and enabling operators to investigate whether the change
reflects malicious tampering or a legitimate manual or adaptive
reconfiguration. This distinction is ultimately made by the
plant operator; the proposed device reveals what was pre-
viously invisible, owing to the stealthy nature of the attack
established in Section IV. Detection is governed by two
parameters: an observation window Tw, which sets the interval
over which a change in the equilibrium is sought, and a dwell
time Td, which sets how long that change must persist before
it is declared significant. Both depend on the response time
of the conditioning filters and the settling time of the slowest
PLL the plant operator may employ, and the dwell time should
exceed the duration of the transients expected under both
normal and adverse grid conditions, while the magnitude and
clarity of the equilibrium offset can be optimized by tuning
ωN. Accordingly, there is a trade-off: a small dwell time
yields early detection but may register transients as tampering,
whereas a larger dwell time delays detection but ensures no
false positives occur. However, since the impact of this attack
manifests only during significant transients, which are unlikely
to occur within even a few seconds of the attack, a more con-
servative dwell time is generally preferable. Moreover, since
the equilibrium points are functions only of the PLL gains
and the grid frequency, the latter being practically constant
over the timescale of the attack, a sustained equilibrium offset
can arise solely from a gain change, thereby precluding false
positives.
The algorithmic equivalent of the detection pipeline is pre-
sented in Algorithm 1. At every sample, the equilibrium vector
ηs is compared with its value one observation window Tw
earlier, and whenever a component of the resulting difference
persistently exceeds its corresponding threshold, ϵ∆θ or ϵz, for
longer than the dwell time Td, the associated flag, σ∆θ or σz, is
set to one, signifying a gain-change event. The thresholds and
timing parameters must be selected relative to the noise level,
the filtering parameters, and, most importantly, the steady-state
levels of the equilibrium points. To accommodate possible
gain adaptation, the observation window can be referenced
to the slowest PLL the operator or adaptation algorithm may
employ and conservatively set to a few seconds. Even such a
conservative window detects the tampering well before it can
escalate into harmful operation, whereas a less conservative
design, tuned to the neighborhood of the actual PLL band-
width in use, reduces the detection delay to a few hundred
Algorithm 1 RSU-Based Detection of PLL Gain Tampering
1: Constants: ωN, sampling time Ts
2: Input: equilibrium vector ηs = (∆θs, zs); window Tw;
dwell time Td; thresholds ϵ = (ϵ∆θ, ϵz)
3: Output: flags σ = (σ∆θ, σz)
4: f ←0,
σ ←0,
w ←Tw/Ts
5: Filter ηs through the conditioning low-pass filter
6: for each sample n do
7:
∆η ←|ηs(n) −ηs(n −w)|
▷element-wise
windowed difference
8:
for each component i ∈{∆θ, z} do
9:
if ∆ηi > ϵi then
10:
fi ←fi + Ts
▷accumulate dwell
11:
else
12:
fi ←0
▷reset on transient
13:
end if
14:
if fi ≥Td then
15:
σi ←1
▷gain-change event on component i
16:
end if
17:
end for
18: end for
Fig. 9: Proposed RSU-based PLL.
milliseconds. A malicious gain tampering may go unnoticed
only when it produces an equilibrium change smaller than ϵ∆θ
or ϵz, which occurs for marginal gain changes that in turn have
a negligible impact on the PLL response, thereby ensuring
that any tampering capable of degrading system performance
is reliably detected.
To demonstrate how the proposed design does not disturb
the transient performance of the conventional SRF PLL, the
transfer function between θP and θg =
R
ωgdt is formulated:
θP
θg
=
kps + ki
s2 + kps + ki
,
(44)
which obviously coincides with that of the SRF PLL, con-
trary to the alternative synchronization designs presented in
[18], [19] that fundamentally alter the dynamics of the PLL.
Therefore, the proposed and conventional SRF PLLs are small-
signal equivalent and exhibit identical small-signal responses.
Consequently, since they share a common input-output rela-
tion, any small-signal stability analysis carried out for the SRF
PLL yields exactly the same results for the proposed surrogate
9
RSU-based PLL, including that of Section V. Moreover, given
its low computational complexity, comprising the same num-
ber of states as the SRF PLL, and owing to this equivalence,
the proposed structure can be readily integrated into existing
GFL configurations, augmenting them with the ability to detect
malicious gain tampering while fully preserving the tracking
performance of the original PLL.
Another important advantage of the proposed scheme over
[18] is that it can be readily adopted to any GFL control
structure. Specifically, the controller in Fig. 2 requires accurate
current decoupling to actively isolate the active and reactive
power responses. This decoupling relies on an explicit for-
mulation of the Park transformation rotating frequency, which
is not available in [18], [19]. In contrast, for the proposed
approach, the rotating frequency is given by:
ωP = ωN + kiz + kp ˙z,
= ωN + kiz + kp
 arctan vR
c,q −kpz

.
(45)
The proposed surrogate PLL can also be combined with
the same quadratic signal generator (QSG)-based positive-
and negative-sequence separation employed by a conventional
SRF PLL [26], thereby enabling operation under unbalanced
networks and dominant low-order harmonics, such as the
5th and 7th. The integration is a drop-in modification: the
QSG sequence-separation stage is retained unchanged, and
only the synchronization-loop equations, i.e. (22)-(23) are
replaced by those of the RSU-based PLL in (40)-(41), with
the frequency-adaptive resonators driven by the RSU output
frequency (45). The small-signal equivalence between the
two PLLs is preserved under this implementation, since their
small-signal input-output relation is identical and the QSGs
derive the filtered positive- and negative-sequence signals from
the output frequency of each PLL, which, as proven above,
are small-signal equivalent. The same conditioned sequence
signals are therefore presented to both loops, leaving the
equivalence intact.
A. Extension of the Detection Scheme to Multi-Layer IBR
Control
Extending the proposed detection scheme to other IBR
controllers is straightforward and relies on the uniqueness of
the equilibrium points of the power system. Unlike PLLs,
these controllers can be suitably modified such that any
change in a controller gain produces a unique effect on the
equilibrium point of the controllers’ internal states. Without
loss of generality, the following alternative PI controller is
considered:
u = kp (axr −x) + ki
Z
(xr −x) ,
(46)
where x and xr denote the measured and reference states,
respectively, and a ∈(0, 1) is a constant introduced to mask
the controller’s equilibrium point.
Implementing this PI controller in place of a conventional
one yields unique, nonlinear equilibrium-point mappings of
the form:
0 = g (kp, ki, xr)
|
{z
}
Nonlinear function
,
(47)
TABLE II: Experimental testbench parameters.
Parameter
GFL Inverter
GFM Inverter
Power Rating
0.1 MVA
1 MVA
Frequency Droop
5%
2%
Voltage Droop
5%
5%
Common System Parameters
Base Load
0.3 MVA
Line
0.01 Ω, 0.2 mH
Switching Frequency
15 kHz
Nominal Line Voltage
400 V
which enable the detection of controller gain tampering by
recovering the controller gains from the solutions of g = 0.
Such gain recovery is feasible only for the plant operator, who,
analogous to the case of the PLL and the parameter ωN, is the
sole entity with knowledge of the controller structure and the
parameters a. This property significantly complicates attempts
by an adversary to mask equilibrium-point alterations, thereby
enhancing the resilience of the SRF PLL-based control archi-
tecture against attacks targeting critical IBR infrastructure.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents an experimental validation of the
proposed detection scheme under realistic operating conditions
using a CHIL setup, depicted in Fig. 10. Two scenarios are
examined, under balanced and under unbalanced, distorted grid
conditions, respectively. Each scenario establishes the small-
signal equivalence between the RSU-based and conventional
SRF PLLs, and further demonstrates the real-time applicability
of the proposed PLL and its ability to detect the adopted threat
model. The attack is applied to a GFL IBR, whose firing pulses
are generated by a controller implemented on a Speedgoat
Baseline real-time target, while the cyber-physical system is
emulated in the Typhoon HIL 404 environment.
A. Operation and Attack Detection under Balanced Grid
Conditions
The system shown in Fig. 3 is considered, where a GFL
converter is connected to a grid emulated by a GFM converter.
The critical system and controller parameters are summarized
in Table II. The synchronization PLL bandwidth is set to
20 Hz and the frequency-estimation bandwidth to 2.5 Hz, with
ζ = 1/
√
2 and fN = 49.9 Hz = ωN/2π. Furthermore, the
detection algorithm parameters are set to ϵ∆θ = 2 × 10−2,
ϵz = 5 × 10−4, and Td = Tw = 0.8 s. The two objectives
are to demonstrate that the proposed PLL implementation
behaves identically to the conventional SRF PLL, and to verify
the effectiveness of the detection framework. All presented
signals are filtered using a low-pass filter with a 100 Hz cut-
off frequency.
Fig. 11 illustrates the system response of the grid-supporting
IBR employing the proposed and conventional PLLs under
various contingencies, including reference power and load
changes. The theoretical analysis is validated through the
active and reactive power responses and the frequency estima-
tion shown in Figs. 11a-11c. As expected, the GFL converter
smoothly tracks the reference setpoint while the system fre-
quency remains within the deadband, thereby nullifying grid-
support services. When the frequency exits the ±0.1 Hz band
at t = 7.5 s due to an abrupt load increase (15 kW, 45 kVar),
10
Fig. 10: Experimental benchmark.
the power output is immediately adjusted to accommodate the
new operating conditions.
To demonstrate the attack-detection capability of the pro-
posed PLL, the adopted threat model is applied by actively
altering the PLL gains of the frequency estimator. For compar-
ison, the detector introduced in [18], which enables detection
based on the phase estimation error, is also considered. In
the first scenario, the adversary sets ka
i = kn
i /3 at t = 5 s.
The results are shown in Fig. 12. Immediately after the
attack, all system states are perturbed, including the active
power and estimated frequency depicted in Figs. 12a and 12d,
which subsequently converge to the same equilibrium point.
However, the equilibrium points of the internal phase error
(Fig. 12b) and z (Fig. 12c) are significantly shifted, indicating
a gain manipulation. This is also observed in Fig. 12e, where
both flags switch to one approximately 0.8 s after the inception
of the attack, as dictated by Td. In contrast, the detector
of [18], based on the phase estimation error of the SRF
PLL, fails to detect the abnormality, and the system remains
undisturbed during the gain change. This behavior is consistent
across additional attack scenarios involving more complex
gain-tampering patterns.
The attack is also detected when both or only the propor-
tional gain is modified. The system responses for ka
p = kn
p /2,
ka
i = 3kn
i and ka
p = 2kn
p , are shown in Figs. 13 and 14,
respectively. In both cases, the frequency estimator continues
to track the grid frequency (Figs. 13a and 14a), while the active
power output (Figs. 13d and 14d) is significantly disturbed
before converging to the original equilibrium. In contrast, the
equilibrium points of z (Figs. 13c and 14c) and the phase
error (Figs. 13b and 14b) are notably shifted, enabling attack
detection. As in the previous scenario, because the integral
action remains active, the detector of [18] cannot identify the
attack, which remains completely stealthy from its perspective.
In practice, the minimum detection delay is upper-bounded
by the sum of the settling times of the conditioning filter
(≈0.04 s) and the PLL (≈0.34 s), since the two stages
respond in series; this yields a conservative estimate of roughly
0.38 s, the true combined response being somewhat faster. The
dwell time Td can therefore be set from this floor, for fastest
response, up to a few seconds; here it is set higher to cover the
settling of any PLL configuration the operator may employ.
B. Performance under Unbalanced and Distorted Grid Con-
ditions
This section assesses the proposed detection mechanism
under unbalanced and distorted grid conditions. A stiff grid bus
is considered, with phases a, b, and c set to 0.98 ∠+0.5◦pu,
1.05 ∠−1.5◦pu, and 0.96 ∠−0.5◦pu, respectively, introduc-
ing a non-negligible negative-sequence component in addition
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 11: System response using the SRF- and the proposed PLL.
to the nominal positive-sequence voltage. To reject the result-
ing distortion, the PLLs are equipped with decoupling QSG
networks [26], and the synchronization PLL bandwidth is set
to 25 Hz given the grid stiffness. Furthermore, the deadband is
tightened from ±0.1 Hz to ±0.05 Hz to stress-test the detec-
tion scheme under the resulting increase in primary-controller
activity and noise sensitivity. In this benchmark, a single PLL
performs both synchronization and frequency estimation, as in
[17], with ωo obtained by low-pass filtering the PLL frequency
at 5 Hz. Here, fN = 46 Hz = ωN/2π, increasing the differ-
ence |ωg −ωN| and thereby enlarging the equilibrium offsets
and the sensitivity to the PLL gains, which facilitates detection.
Now, the detection parameters are set to ϵ∆θ = 5 × 10−3,
ϵz = 1×10−4, and Td = Tw = 1 s. Furthermore, the switching
frequency is now reduced to 10 kHz to demonstrate that the
proposed detection scheme remains effective even under lower
sampling rates, underscoring its real-time applicability and
industrial integration. Two scenarios are examined. The first
establishes that the proposed and conventional SRF PLLs, both
employing QSG networks, remain equivalent and robust under
these conditions. The second verifies that the detection scheme
reliably exposes PLL gain tampering despite the negative-
sequence component and harmonic distortion.
11
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 12: System response after integral-only gain tampering.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 13: System response after proportional-integral gain tampering.
The first scenario applies a sequence of disturbances. The
grid frequency is stepped to 50.1 Hz at t = 2 s and to 49.9 Hz
at t = 4 s. A voltage sag is then imposed at t = 6 s,
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 14: System response after proportional gain tampering.
during which the magnitude of each phase drops to 70 %,
and is cleared at t = 8 s. Finally, at t = 10 s, 5th and 7th
harmonics of magnitude 0.06 pu and 0.09 pu are injected,
respectively. The system response is shown in Fig. 15. As
in the balanced-grid case, the two implementations perform
practically identically. The active power (Fig. 15a) smoothly
tracks the outer-loop frequency-support commands following
the frequency steps, while the reactive power (Fig. 15b)
adheres to the primary controller, saturating at 14 kVar during
the sag at t = 6 s and recovering to its pre-fault value once
the fault clears. The frequency estimates (Fig. 15c) remain
virtually identical even through transients, as the zoomed-in
plots confirm. Finally, the resilience to higher-order harmonics
is evident at t = 10 s, where both PLLs continue to operate
correctly despite the increased harmonic content in the mea-
sured signals.
The effectiveness of the detection scheme is demonstrated
in the second scenario, illustrated in Fig. 16, under the same
unbalanced grid with constant injection of the 5th and 7th
harmonics of the previous test case. A voltage sag of 0.7 pu
occurs at t = 4 s and is cleared at t = 4.5 s. The adversary
exploits this disturbance as cover, targeting the synchronization
PLL and setting ka
p = 0.8kn
p at t = 6 s, shortly after the sag
clears. Despite the concurrent disturbances, the proposed PLL
operates nominally and continues to track the grid frequency,
as shown in Fig. 16a. Since the PLL equilibrium points depend
only on the grid frequency and on the PLL gains, neither the
voltage sag nor the harmonic distortion can mask the effect
of the proportional-gain tampering. The tampering appears as
a transient in the power output (Fig. 16d) and in the internal
state z (Fig. 16c), which returns to its pre-attack equilibrium
as expected from (43) since zs is independent of kp, and,
more importantly, as a persistent offset in the equilibrium of
the internal phase error (Fig. 16b), which the plant operator
can observe as evidence that the gains have been altered.
Evidently, as shown in Fig. 16e, after approximately one
12
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 15: System response using the SRF and the proposed PLLs under
unbalanced and distorted grid voltage.
second, dictated by Td, the phase-error detector is activated,
indicating the tampering, while, as in the balanced-grid case,
the detector of [18] again remains unperturbed and unaware
of the compromise. In this case, the minimum detection delay
comprises ≈0.04 s for the conditioning filter and ≈0.04 s
for the PLL settling time, giving a lower bound of ≈0.08 s.
As before, this delay is small enough to leave the attack
little opportunity to manifest before the operator is alerted;
here, however, similarly to the previous scenario, Td is set
higher, to 1 s, to cover the settling times of all plausible gain
combinations and potential transients under normal or adverse
operating conditions.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper demonstrates how an adversary who overcomes
local system defenses can manipulate critical control gains
of PLLs responsible for synchronizing and controlling grid-
supporting GFL IBRs, thereby limiting ancillary services and,
in severe cases, destabilizing the underlying IBR infrastruc-
ture. To characterize this threat, an explicit analysis accounting
for all cyber-physical and control aspects of grid-connected
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 16: System response after proportional gain tampering under
unbalanced and distorted grid voltage.
converters, including line and grid dynamics, was conducted,
revealing the road-map an adversary could follow to com-
promise IBR resources stealthily. The analysis further shows
that, while the additional frequency-support loop improves
the stability margins and overall small-signal behavior of
the converters, poor tuning can provoke severe interactions
between control layers and even instability.
To counter this threat, an alternative PLL implementation
based on the RSU was introduced. Unlike prior approaches,
the proposed scheme preserves the performance of the SRF
PLL, has low computational complexity and is therefore
readily applicable to existing GFL infrastructure, and, most
importantly, detects both proportional and integral gain tam-
pering by monitoring the internal equilibrium points, which
shift whenever either gain is altered. Its effectiveness was
validated through extensive CHIL benchmarks under normal,
unbalanced, and distorted operating conditions, confirming
reliable detection of the otherwise stealthy attack.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Fan and Z. Miao, Modeling and Stability Analysis of Inverter-Based
Resources.
CRC Press, 2023.
[2] S. Shah, P. Koralewicz, V. Gevorgian, H. Liu, and J. Fu, “Impedance
methods for analyzing stability impacts of inverter-based resources:
13
Stability analysis tools for modern power systems,” IEEE Electrification
Magazine, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 53–65, 2021.
[3] I. Zografopoulos, N. D. Hatziargyriou, and C. Konstantinou, “Distributed
energy resources cybersecurity outlook: Vulnerabilities, attacks, impacts,
and mitigations,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 6695–6709,
2023.
[4] H. M. Khalid, M. M. Qasaymeh, S. M. Muyeen, M. S. E. Moursi,
A. M. Foley, T. O. Sweidan, and P. Sanjeevikumar, “WAMS Operations
in Power Grids: A Track Fusion-Based Mixture Density Estimation-
Driven Grid Resilient Approach Toward Cyberattacks,” IEEE Systems
Journal, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 3950–3961, 2023.
[5] H. M. Khalid, F. Flitti, M. S. Mahmoud, M. M. Hamdan, S. M. Muyeen,
and Z. Y. Dong, “Wide Area Monitoring System Operations in Modern
Power Grids: A Median Regression Function-Based State Estimation
Approach Towards Cyber Attacks,” Sustainable Energy, Grids and
Networks, vol. 34, p. 101009, 2023.
[6] M. Amin, F. F. M. El-Sousy, G. A. Abdel Aziz, K. Gaber, and O. A.
Mohammed, “CPS attacks mitigation approaches on power electronic
systems with security challenges for smart grid applications: A review,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 38 571–38 601, 2021.
[7] I. Zografopoulos, J. Ospina, X. Liu, and C. Konstantinou, “Cyber-
Physical Energy Systems Security: Threat Modeling, Risk Assessment,
Resources, Metrics, and Case Studies,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 29 775–
29 818, 2021.
[8] A. Walker, J. Desai, D. Saleem, and T. Gunda, “Cybersecurity in
photovoltaic plant operations,” Nat. Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL),
Golden, CO, USA, Tech. Rep., Mar. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1774870
[9] CERT Polska, “Energy Sector Incident Report – 29 December
2025,” CERT Polska, Tech. Rep., Jan. 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://cert.pl/en/posts/2026/01/incident-report-energy-sector-2025/
[10] Z. Zhang, R. Deng, and D. K. Y. Yau, “Vulnerability of the Load
Frequency Control Against the Network Parameter Attack,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 921–933, 2024.
[11] Z. Zhang, R. Deng, Y. Tian, P. Cheng, and J. Ma, “SPMA: Stealthy
Physics-Manipulated Attack and Countermeasures in Cyber-Physical
Smart Grid,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
vol. 18, pp. 581–596, 2023.
[12] Z. A. Alexakis, A. T. Alexandridis, P. C. Papageorgiou, and G. C.
Konstantopoulos, “Design of a bandwidth limiting PLL for grid-tied
inverters with guaranteed stability,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 774–784, 2025.
[13] X. Wang, L. Harnefors, and F. Blaabjerg, “Unified Impedance Model
of Grid-Connected Voltage-Source Converters,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 775–1787, 2018.
[14] “IEEE Standard for Interconnection and Interoperability of Distributed
Energy Resources with Associated Electric Power Systems Interfaces,”
IEEE Std 1547-2018 (Revision of IEEE Std 1547-2003), pp. 1–138,
2018.
[15] Q.-C. Zhong and G. Weiss, “Synchronverters: Inverters that mimic
synchronous generators,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1259–1267, 2011.
[16] L. Li, D. Zhu, J. Hu, L. Lin, X. Zou, and Y. Kang, “Fast inertial response
of PMSG-based wind turbines with optimized frequency-locked loop,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 2697–2701,
2025.
[17] A. Kontou, M. Syed, A. Paspatis, Z. Feng, C. Konstantinou, and
N. Hatziargyriou, “Exploiting the inherent cyber resilience of inverter-
dominated microgrids against PLL attack,” IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Electronics, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 1487–1492, 2026.
[18] A. Bamigbade, Y. Dvorkin, and R. Karri, “Cyberattack on phase-locked
loops in inverter-based energy resources,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 821–833, 2024.
[19] A. Bamigbade and F. de León, “Secure voltage-modulated vector
current control of distributed energy resources using delayed DSOGI
under distorted and unbalanced grid conditions,” IEEE Transactions on
Industry Applications, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 1091–1101, 2025.
[20] A. Yazdani and R. Iravani, Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Sys-
tems: Modeling, Control, and Applications.
IEEE Press/Wiley, 2010.
[21] P. S. Kundur, Power System Stability and Control.
New York, NY,
USA: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
[22] ENTSO-E
AISBL,
“Frequency
Sensitive
Mode:
Implementation
Guidance Document for Network Codes on Grid Connection,” ENTSO-
E Guidance Document, Brussels, Belgium, Jan. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/rfg/
[23] S. D. Antón, D. Fraunholz, C. Lipps, F. Pohl, M. Zimmermann, and
H. D. Schotten, “Two decades of SCADA exploitation: A brief history,”
in 2017 IEEE Conference on Application, Information and Network
Security (AINS), 2017, pp. 98–104.
[24] Z. A. Alexakis, A. T. Alexandridis, P. C. Papageorgiou, and G. C.
Konstantopoulos, “Novel VSI synchronization unit with increased ro-
bustness: Detailed analysis and validation,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 2219–2230, 2024.
[25] Y. Wu, H. Wu, F. Zhao, Z. Li, and X. Wang, “Influence of PLL on
stability of interconnected grid-forming and grid-following converters,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 11 980–
11 985, 2024.
[26] P. Rodríguez, R. Teodorescu, I. Candela, A. V. Timbus, M. Liserre,
and F. Blaabjerg, “New positive-sequence voltage detector for grid
synchronization of power converters under faulty grid conditions,” in
2006 37th IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Conference, 2006, pp.
1–7.
14
